
## 1. MIPS Memory Map

First of all let's set out 2 things:

- word: 32-bits (for MIPS)
- byte: 8-bits (always, by the definition)

MIPS uses 32-bit memory addresses and memory is byte addressable, this means that each memory address has its own unique address that is 8-bits. This means that if your memory starts at address 0x00000000 then the next byte is at 0x00000001, then 0x00000002.

This memory is separated into a structure like this:

| Reserved     | 0xFFFFFFFC - 0x80000000     |
| ------------ | --------------------------- |
| Dynamic Data | **0x7FFFFFFC - 0x10010000** |
| Global Data  | 0x1000FFFC - 0x10000000     |
| Text         | 0x0FFFFFFC - 0x00400000     |
| Reserved     | 0x003FFFFC - 0x00000000     |

**Reserved**: 
- These segments are used by the operating system and cannot directly be used by the program.

**Dynamic Data**: 
- This segment stores data that is dynamically allocated and deallocated throughout the execution of the program. 
- It is the largest segment of memory used by the program.
- It spans almost 2GB of the address space.
- Data in this segment is stored in a stack and a heap.

**Global Data**:
- This segment stores global variables, which can be seen by all functions in a program. It can store 64KB of data.
- Global variables are accessed using the pointer $gp.
- By convention, we initialise the $gp at the middle of the global data segment at value 0x10008000.
- The value of $gp stays constant throughout execution, and global variables are addressed as offsets from 0x10008000.

**Text**: 
- This segment is the fun one, it stores the machine language program.
- It can store almost 256MB of code.
- The four most significant bits of any word address in text segment are all 0 (and the least two).
- So, the 26 bits of the $addr$ field of the $j$ instruction suffice to specify the address of any instruction stored in the text segment.

---

## 2. MIPS Addressing Modes

In MIPS, an addressing mode is just a set of rule or method the processor uses to figure out where to find data it needs to work with, and there are 5 of these addressing modes:

- Register Only (Reading and Writing Operands)
- Immediate (Reading and Writing Operands)
- Base Addressing (Reading and Writing Operands)
- PC-Relative (Writing the Program Counter)
- Pseudo-direct (Writing the Program Counter)

Let's go through each mode individually, Firstly with register only addressing.

### **Register Only**:

- Uses registers for all source and destination operands.
- R-type instructions use register only addressing.

### **Immediate**:

- Uses registers and a 16-bit immediate as operands.
- Some of the I-type instructions use immediate addressing

### **Base Addressing**:

- Used in memory access instructions.
- Implemented by I-type instructions.
- The address of the memory operand is computed by adding the base address in register $rs$ to a 16-bit offset stored in $imm$.

The instructions for base addressing (also called base-offset or displacement addressing) are as follows (These all read and write data from and to the memory):

- $lw$   # load word
- $lb$    # load byte
- $sw$  # store word
- $sb$   # store byte

With each of these commands, they allow loading data **from memory** (at base + offset) into a register, or storing data **from a register** into memory at base + offset: $$
lw \ $t0, \ 4($s0)
$$
In much clearer terms, this means load the word from the memory location at address ($s0 + 4) and store it into register $t0.

### **PC-relative**: 

- Branching instructions can use PC-relative addressing to specify the new value of the PC (Program Counter) if the branch is taken.

Consider this MIPS assembly code fragment:

| 0x40 | loop: | add  | $t1, | $a0,   | $s0  |
| ---- | ----- | ---- | ---- | ------ | ---- |
| 0x44 |       | lb   | $t1, | 0($t1) |      |
| 0x48 |       | add  | $t2, | $a1,   | $s0  |
| 0x4C |       | sb   | $t1, | 0($t2) |      |
| 0x50 |       | addi | $s0, | $s0,   | 1    |
| 0x54 |       | bne  | $t1, | $0,    | loop |
| 0x58 |       | lw   | $s0, | 0($sp) |      |

On the left-hand side, in hexadecimal, is the address of the word storing the instruction. The branching instruction in this fragment is the I-type $bne$, it compares the values of registers $t1 and $0 and branches when they are not equal. If the branch is taken, the new value of the PC is 0x40, corresponding to the label loop.

Notice that when we use assembly, we do not have to worry how the new PC value will be computed. We just use labels. But how is the assembly code translated to machine language? 

To calculate the $imm$, we take the PC value immediately after the branching instruction, here 0x58, we subtract it from the Branch Target Address (BTA), here 0x40, and divide by 4. Here, the result will be -6.

Equivalently, we can just count the number of instructions from PC+4 to BTA, using a minus sign if BTA is above PC+4. Note that, during the execution of $bne$ in our fragment, the value of the PC is 0x58, because we first increment the PC (add 4), and then execute an instruction.

### **Pseudo-direct**:

In direct addressing, an address is specified in the instruction. MIPS does not support direct addressing, which would need 32-bits for the address and 6-bits for the opcode, while the instruction has 32-bits only.

MIPS uses pseudo-direct addressing in J-type instructions, calculating the new value of the PC, called the Jump Target Address (JTA) as follows:

- The two least significant bits are left to 0 (instructions are word aligned and word addresses are multiples of 4).
- The next 26 bits are taken from the $addr$ field of the J-type instruction.
- The four most significant bits are again left to 0 (recall the slide on the text segment of the memory map). 

This last point is only possible because these jumps can only happen within the 256MB segment. The 26-bit $addr$ field of the j instruction is computed from the JTA, here the address of the instruction labelled sum, which is: 0x004000A0. In binary, that address is: $$
0000 \ 0100 \ 0000 \ 0000 \ 0000 \ 1010 \ 00
$$
and we can remove the first 4 and the last 2 bits to get our addr: $$
0000 \ 0100 \ 0000 \ 0000 \ 0000 \ 1010 \ 00
$$









