## 1. Microcontroller

Microcontrollers are integrated devices consisting of:
- A microprocessor 
- Memory
- Input / Output

They are used in embedded systems, that is, special purpose computer systems (title mentioned) designed to perform dedicated functions, often in real-time.

The program is usually stored in flash memory, and it might never change during the lifetime of the microcontroller.

Arduino UNO uses the ATmega328P microcontroller:

- Harvard architecture
- 8-bit processor
- 16-bit words

---

## 2. Registers

For the ATmega328P it has 32 general purpose 8-bit registers $R_{0}-R_{31}$. They are also mapped (copied) on the SRAM memory. Other SRAM memory locations are also used as registers that means they are designated as registers. Also the last 6 registers play a special role in addressing.

For a register $R_{n}$, it can be considered that the six registers $R_{26}-R_{31}$ should be treated as three 16-bit registers, named $X, Y$ and $Z$. That can be used for indirect addressing.

The status register is an 8-bit register, not one of the 32 general purpose registers. Its 8-bits are used as flags, and in the documentation of the AVR assembly have standard names.

| Bit name          | I   | T   | H   | S   | V   | N   | Z   | C   |
| ----------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Example bit value | 0   | 1   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 1   | 0   | 1   |

In one of the usages of the status register, arithmetic and logical instructions may update some of the status register bits, depending on the result of the operation. This information can then be used by the next instruction.

---

## 3. Memory

There are two main memory spaces for Harvard architecture, the Data memory (SRAM and EEPROM) and the Program Memory (Flash). The same essentially architecture comes in various memory sizes (and perhaps some additional capabilities).

Since AVR instructions are 16 or 32 bits wide, the Flash is organised as 2/4/8/16K x 16 (16K x 16 in 328P). It is divided into two sections, Boot Loader section and Application Program Section. The program counter is 14 bits wide, thus addressing the 16K program memory locations.

### Data memory (SRAM)


| 32 Registers                      | 0x0000 - 0x001F               |
| --------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| 64 I/O Registers                  | 0x0020 - 0x005F               |
| 160 EXT I/O Registers             | 0x0060 - 0x00FF               |
| Internal SRAM (512,1024,2048 x 8) | 0x0100 - 0x02FF/0x04FF/0x08FF |
The static Random Access Memory is divided into sections used as:
- mapping space of ALU registers
- I/O registers and extended I/O registers
- internal SRAM

### EEPROM memory

1KB of EEPROM (Electronically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory) Is organised as a separate space for storing data. 

---

## 4. I/O ports

ATmega328P's I/O pins are grouped into three ports:

| B   | (digital) | Blue  |
| --- | --------- | ----- |
| C   | (analog)  | Beige |
| D   | (digital) | Green |

### Data Direction Registers

The direction of each pin of a port (input or output) is controlled by 8-bit Data Direction Register: DDRB, DDRC, DDRD.

Notice that we not have to use the explicit memory locations (they are just I/O registers specified by the manufacturer) and use them instead, that would affect the compatibility of our code with other AVR microcontrollers. To understand this better let's see an example, whether a pin is used as input or output is controlled by a single bit: 
- We say a bit is set when it is 1. Then, the corresponding pin is output.
- A bit is cleared when it is 0. Then, the corresponding pin is input.

We can control the pin's direction by manipulating single values of register with the instruction SBI (set bit) and CBI (clear bit).

| SBI | DDRB, | 4   | Declare pin PB4 as output |
| --- | ----- | --- | ------------------------- |
| CBI | DDRD, | 2   | Declare pin PD2 as input  |
### Reading input pin values

Assume that a pin has been declared as input pin. At any specific moment in time, this pin has certain status. Either there is an incoming electrical signal, or not.

This information is recorded on the corresponding bit of the corresponding I/O register, PINB, PINC and PIND.

### Setting output pin values

Assume that a pin has been declared as output pin. At any specific moment in time, we can set this pin to a certain status. Either we send an outcoming electrical signal through that pin, or not.

This is controlled by the corresponding bit of the I/O registers PORTB, PORTC, PORTD. In the previous example we declared pin PB4 as input. The second bit (PORTB, 4) of the register PORTB controls the current status of that pin. By setting that bit, we send electrical current through that pin. By clearing it, the electric current stops.







