
Term Table

## 1. Stacks

A stack is a collection of objects that are inserted and removed according to the last-in-first-out (LIFO) principle. Objects can be inserted into a stack at any time, but only the most recently inserted object (the last) can be removed at any time.

A stack supports the following methods:
- $push(e):$ Insert element $e$ at the top of the stack.
- $pop$: Remove and return the top element of the stack; an error occurs if the stack is empty an error occurs.

Also possible methods:
- $size$: Returns the number of elements in the stack.
- $isEmpty$: Returns a Boolean indicating if the stack is empty.
- $top$: Returns the top element in the stack, without removing it; an error occurs if the stack is empty.

We can implement this data structure using an array as follows:

- The stack consists of an $N$-element array $S$. And an integer variable $t$ that gives the top element of the stack.
- We initialise $t$ to $-1$, and we use this value for $t$ to identify an empty stack.

This implementation is time efficient, the time taken by all methods does not depend on the size of the stack. However, the fixed size $N$ of the array can be a serious limitation:
- If the size of the stack is much less than the size of the array, we waste memory.
- If the size of the stack exceeds the size of the array, the implementation will generate an exception.
This means that the array-based implementation of the stack has fixed capacity.

---

## 2. Queues

A queue is a collection of objects that are inserted and removed according to the first-in-first-out (FIFO) principle. Element access and deletion are restricted to the first element in the sequence, which is called the front of the queue. Element insertion is restricted to the end of the sequence, which is called the rear of the queue.

A queue supports the following methods:
- $enqueue(e)$: Insert element $e$ at the rear of the queue.
- $dequeue$: Remove and return from the queue the element at the front; an error occurs if the queue is empty.

Also possible methods:
- $size$: Returns the number of elements in the queue
- $isEmpty$: Return a Boolean indicating if the queue is empty.
- $front$: Return the front element of the queue, without removing it; an error occurs if the queue is empty.

In order to implement a queue using an array (we shall call the array $Q$), we use $2$ variables $f$ and $r$, which have the following meaning:
- $f$ is an index to the cell of $Q$ storing the front of the queue, unless the queue is empty, in which case $f=r$.
- $r$ is an index to the next available array cell in $Q$, that is, the cell after the rear of $Q$, if $Q$ is not empty.
So initially we assign $f=r=0$, indicating that the queue is empty. After each dequeue operation we increment $f$. After each enqueue operation $r$ is incremented and is never decremented. After $N$ enqueue operations we would get an array-out-of bounds error. To avoid this problem, we let $r$ and $f$ wrap around the end of $Q$ by using modulo $N$ arithmetic on them. For example the following functions could be written in pseudocode as:

$size$:
```
return (r-f) mod N
```

$enqueue$:
```
if size = N - 1 then
	throw a FullQueueException
end if
Q[r] = e
r = r + 1 mod N
```

$dequeue$:
```
if isEmpty then
	throw a EmptyQueueException
end if
temp = Q[f]
Q[f] = NULL
f = f + 1 mod N
return temp
```

If the size of the queue is $N$, then $f=r$ and the isEmpty method returns $true$, even though the queue is not empty. We avoid this problem by keeping the maximum number of elements that can be stored in the queue to $N-1$. See the FullQueueException in the enqueue algorithm.
