
## 1. Theory of Sorting

### Theorem

For any **comparison-based** sorting algorithm $A$ and any $n \in N$ large enough there exists an input of length $n$ that required $A$ to perform $\Omega(n\log n)$ comparisons.

Two observations of this are:
1. Theorem talks about "comparison-based" algorithms. Vast majority of sorting algorithms are in that class.
2. Theorem says "there exists an input". That means that for most inputs (possibly all but one!) of length $n$ it may actually beat the bound, but that there must be at least one for which it does not.

### Constraints on The Problem

Suppose the values in the list to be sorted can repeat but the values have a limit (eg. values are digits from 0 to 9). Sorting in this case, appears easier. Is it possible to come up with an algorithm better than $O(n\log n)$, yes but the strategy will not involve comparisons.

---

## 2. Bucket Sort

### Algorithm

let the array of buckets be $b$, and the list of values to be $S$.

for $j=0$ to $k-1$ do (Setup $k$ buckets)
	$b[j]=0$
end for
for $i=0$ to $n-1$ do (Place elements in their right buckets)
	$b[S[i]]=b[S[i]]+1$
end for
$i=0$
for $j=0$ to $k-1$ do (Place elements in buckets back in $S$)
	for $r=1$ to $b[j]$ do
	$S[i]=j$
	$i=i+1$
	end for
end for

### Explanation

Basically what happens here is $k$ buckets are created, then each number in the list $S$ is placed into the index of buckets with its value so if there are buckets with indexes $0,1,2,3,4,5,6$ and the number $4$ needs to be added then it will be added to the bucket with index $4$, essentially the $5th$ bucket. Then we place all the elements from each bucket back into the list $S$, in order of ascending index. This means that they will all be sorted when put back into $S$.

### Time Complexity

Bucket Setup: $O(k)$
From array to buckets: $O(n)$
From buckets to array: $O(n)$

---

## 3. Radix Sort

### Explanation

With radix sort, the idea is to have as many buckets as you've got different digits, that means for base-10 you would have 10 of them. So even if you have 1 million elements to be sorted only 10 buckets would be needed, and you just repeatedly bucket-sort by given digit. The number of times this will be done depends on the values (the longer the base-10 representations, the more rounds), but number of buckets only depends on number of different digits.

### Example

given the array $A=[67,23,90,6,43,22,18,75,49,12,36]$, we will first look at the right-most digit, and place them into the buckets corresponding.

| Bucket 0 | $90$    |
| -------- | ------- |
| Bucket 1 |         |
| Bucket 2 | $22,12$ |
| Bucket 3 | $23,43$ |
| Bucket 4 |         |
| Bucket 5 | $75$    |
| Bucket 6 | $6,36$  |
| Bucket 7 | $67$    |
| Bucket 8 | $18$    |
| Bucket 9 | $49$    |
Extracting in order of ascending buckets we form the new mutated array $A'=[90,22,12,23,43,75,6,36,67,18,49]$. And if we run again on the new array:


| Bucket 0 | $6$     |
| -------- | ------- |
| Bucket 1 |         |
| Bucket 2 | $12,18$ |
| Bucket 3 | $36$    |
| Bucket 4 | $43,49$ |
| Bucket 5 |         |
| Bucket 6 | $67$    |
| Bucket 7 | $75$    |
| Bucket 8 |         |
| Bucket 9 | $90$    |

If we then put these buckets back into an array in ascending order we will have an array $A''$ that is the sorted version of $A$. Now, this algorithm only works if the BucketSort phases are stable. For an algorithm to be stable it has to keep the original order of equal elements after sorting.

---

## 4. Binary Search

For this let's make the assumptions that:
- We are given an array of $n$ numbers in array $A1[1\dots n]$
- Suppose that this is a sorted list
- Suppose the $n$ numbers are pairwise distinct (no two are the same).
- Assume you're given a number $x$ that's equal to one of the $n$ numbers above where $$
\exists \text{ index-i } \in \{1,\dots,n\} \text{ such that } x=A[i]
$$
Now what we can do is peek into the middle of the given array at position $p=\left\lceil  \frac{n}{2}  \right\rceil$, and if $A[p]=x$ then we're lucky and done, and can return $p$. Otherwise, if $x>A[p]$, we may focus our search on stuff to the right of $A[p]$ and may completely ignore anything to its left. Likewise if $x<A[p]$, we may focus our search on stuff to the left of $A[p]$ and may completely ignore anything to its right.

### Algorithm

FUNCTION $BinarySearch(array, target, left, right)$
	IF $left > right:$
		RETURN -1
	$mid=\frac{left+right}{2}$
IF $array[mid] = target:$
	RETURN mid
ELSE IF $target<array[mid]$:
	RETURN $BinarySearch(array, target, left, mid -1)$
ELSE:
	RETURN $BinarySearch(array, target, mid+1, right)$

